
767
FXUS66 KMTR 231145
AFDMTR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service San Francisco CA
445 AM PDT Fri Aug 23 2024

...New AVIATION, MARINE...

.SYNOPSIS...
Issued at 128 AM PDT Fri Aug 23 2024

A dynamic upper level system will bring cooler temperatures today
through Saturday. A slight chance of light rain continues across
the North and East Bay tonight and Saturday. Temperatures will
quickly rebound Sunday through Tuesday as the system exits north
and east and high pressure builds in from the west.

&&

.SHORT TERM...
(Today and tonight)
Issued at 137 AM PDT Fri Aug 23 2024

A rare late August mid-latitude low pressure system is located
over far northern California and the Pacific Northwest. A digging
upper level jet stream is on the back side of the 500 mb trough axis
which is moving through a long wave trough along 130W longitude.
The initial 500 mb shortwave vorticity trough is rotating onshore
over far northern California with showers as far south as Cape
Mendocino per KBHX radar. This trough axis extends southward to
off the North Bay coast and will quickly move eastward across
Sonoma, Marin and Napa counties prior to daybreak this morning.
Spot checking forecast soundings over the North Bay shows very
minimal to essentially no instability. However, it does appear
current forecast model qpf is having trouble picking up on current
showers far to the north near Cape Mendocino, thus will monitor
radar and satellite as the southernmost extension of this trough
moves through this morning. Otherwise cool air advection aloft
will greatly weaken the marine layer temperature inversion through
morning, cool air advection and gentle upslope winds will tend to
increase low cloud coverage along with developing a few patches
light drizzle in the morning. Forecast highs today will be
comfortable for August, daytime highs a few degrees below normal
coastside to several degrees below normal inland. Approx 7 Celsius
850 mb temp is forecast at Oakland today, this is near or a little
below the late August minimum moving average. A slight chance to
chance pops are mainly across the North Bay today, dry weather is
forecast to the south today.

For tonight the next spoke of energy i.e. 500 mb vorticity trough
axis within the same low pressure system will sweep across the
North Bay. This will be an interesting combination because while
lower to mid level temperatures cool a little further (staying
near or below late August minimum moving averages) precipitable
water (pw) is forecast to increase to near the 90th percentile for
late August, which is near 1". 1" of pw entrained into a northern
arriving system is not bad; in the cool season approx 0.60" is
common and 0.80" pw would be decent. High sun angle warm season
evaporation rates, water vapor availability may help the low to
some extent (vs cool season lower sun angle etc), it could be the
models are struggling with this combination. Global and mesoscale
models have had trouble forecasting qpf with uncertainty as to how
far south measurable rain may reach across the Bay Area. There`s
good agreement in ensemble forecast qpf that the rain/no rain line
will reach at least to San Francisco/Golden Gate to the East Bay.
Forecast soundings are stable.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Saturday through Thursday)
Issued at 137 AM PDT Fri Aug 23 2024

It`s an eastward progressive synoptic pattern with shortwave
troughs predominating, the aforementioned low will exit the long
wave trough (and our forecast area) with warmer/hotter and dry
weather returning next week. With tropical systems well to our
southwest and an active polar jet stream storm track over the
northernmost CONUS, the subtropical ridge (large scale compressional
warming) will snap back into place here with increasing 500 mb
heights post trough. In general it looks like 850 mb temperatures
climb back upwards to near the 90th percentile for late August
next week. There`s some uncertainty showing up in recent global
models as to how warm 850 mb temperatures will be over our forecast
area next week, including possible flattening of the 500 mb ridge
next week.

&&

.AVIATION...
(12Z TAFS)
Issued at 427 AM PDT Fri Aug 23 2024

The cold front has now pushed through the entire CWA, leaving a
complex mixture of low stratus, mid-level rain clouds, and high
cirrus. There is a lot of clear air between all of these cloud
decks, leading to a highly uncertain forecast. Specifically the
timing and location of MVFR stratus is hard to pin down. The good
news is with low pressure and a deep marine layer, IFR conditions
remain unlikely. Otherwise, moderate onshore winds are expected
in the afternoon as high cloud cover increases and a few light
showers pop up.

Vicinity of SFO...MVFR ceilings at SFO and OAK. These clouds
should begin to break by late morning before returning in the
evening. Light drizzle is possible this morning, with a chance
for a few larger rain drops in the afternoon. A moderate onshore
breeze will develop in the afternoon, but won`t be as strong as
Thursday.

SFO Bridge Approach...Skies are clear over the approach at the
moment and have a good chance of remaining VFR through the day.

Monterey Bay Terminals...MRY is somehow dodging the stratus
tonight while SNS is MVFR with OVC013. The current enhanced IR
satellite image shows this trend is fairly stable in the short
term. The high resolution guidance can`t not agree if it will
hold through the morning. As such, the MRY forecast is highly
uncertain and there is roughly a 50/50 chance for MVFR conditions
at some point this morning. I used persistence as the tie breaker,
but added a SCT015 cloud group to convey the uncertainty.
Otherwise there will be a moderate onshore breeze in the afternoon
before stratus returns this evening.

&&

.MARINE...
(Today through Wednesday)
Issued at 427 AM PDT Fri Aug 23 2024

Gentle to moderate NW winds persist through the weekend after a
cold frontal passage late Thursday. The wind speed will be
dominated by diurnal influences, with small craft advisories in
the San Francisco and Monterey Bays Saturday afternoon. Rough seas
are in store by the middle of next week in the northern waters,
before southerly swell approaches from distant hurricanes late
next week.

&&

.MTR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CA...None.
PZ...Small Craft Advisory from 3 PM to 9 PM PDT Saturday for Mry Bay-
     Pigeon Pt to Pt Pinos 0-10 nm.

     Small Craft Advisory from 3 PM Saturday to 3 AM PDT Sunday for
     Pt Pinos to Pt Piedras Blancas 0-10 nm.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...Canepa
LONG TERM....Canepa
AVIATION...Flynn
MARINE...Flynn

Visit us at www.weather.gov/sanfrancisco

Follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube at:
www.facebook.com/nwsbayarea
www.twitter.com/nwsbayarea
www.youtube.com/nwsbayarea


